Dear Venerable Nun, I would like to ask for your guidance on
two matters. Firstly, I participate in
activities at my own temple, but
can I also participate in programs
of other temples? Secondly, I
normally make offerings
at my own temple, but at certain
times, can I also make offerings
at other temples? Is
this in accordance with the Dharma?
Thank you, Venerable Nun. At Ba Vang Temple, there are
clubs, for example, the Golden Chrysanthemum Club, which
includes many temples. This is called
a common practice program for the entire
club, meaning all temples
practice together.
This question is about two
separate temples that don't practice together. "
Practicing together" means
sharing activities. For example, the Golden National Club has
many temples sharing
activities. Otherwise, after hearing
this,
many members of the Golden National Club might say, "
I still follow my own temple, so why would
I make offerings or participate in activities
with other temples?" Then, Venerable Nun,
you will come...  Regarding the proper answer
to this question, which is that these two Dharma
centers are not
operating together, I respectfully ask:
what kind of practice is it within one Dharma center so that we know whether
or not we should practice within two Dharma centers? And
when should we practice within two Dharma centers?
Practicing within one Dharma center means
we have a hierarchical
structure, we work with
assigned tasks, and because of this assignment,
we can break down what I call
the ego. Respectfully,
in breaking down the ego, there are
many causes and conditions that give rise to it.
For example, if I have money, I go to make offerings
here, I go to make offerings there, I
go to make offerings there. That means this money
nourishes the ego. But when
we operate within one Dharma center,
we know that, "Today, our Dharma center is
organizing an offering to the Three Jewels
or a Summer Retreat. I have a cup,
I'm making an offering here," but I do
n't know who will receive my money or
the object of the offering. I
don't think about it either.  Because
I only have a small part of it,
I only have one thought left:
happiness for the child who made the offering. That's all.
But
if I were to take it myself, I would go here and
there and say, "I made
merit here, I made merit there, I
made merit there."
There's an ego in that. So in
the question, you say, "I'm going to make an offering here, I'm going to make an
offering there." But if not,
we're just going to a Dharma center and saying, "
Today, the Dharma center is going to make an offering here."
In the Dharma center, there are people with money, people with possessions,
people with effort,
but not with money. We've already achieved egolessness from the beginning.
What does egolessness mean? An object or event
created by many causes and conditions is egoless, while
an object or event created by one person alone
has an ego attached to it. We
must understand egolessness and
ego clearly in each action and
each task so that we can observe how,
in our practice, we see
egolessness.  The goal we are going
to is to cultivate
selflessness, respecting superiors and yielding to subordinates. This is a
very profound explanation of the Dharma. That is, the
reverence, the respect for the Dharma, is an unchanging Dharma,
called the eternal Dharma.
This reverence is not formed by any cause or condition;
therefore, it has no cause or condition.
When we practice
reverence, we are in a
respectful state of mind, and we enter the eternal state.
In Buddhism,
this is called the eternal bliss of the self. Entering that eternal state is like
Nirvana; there is no cause or condition to
form Nirvana.
Nirvana is called non-cause and Nirvana. Nirvana possesses
the nature of the mind's tranquility, and when the mind is
tranquil, it is not formed by any cause or condition.
If
we have reverence, we are
returning to the true Dharma without cause or condition.
This is a very deep contemplation, a
meditative state of the practitioner.
In a Dharma practice, those who deserve respect should be
respected, those who deserve to be taught should be taught, and those who deserve to be forgiven
should be forgiven. Then we
have no ego; we achieve
selflessness.  That's what truly brings deep insight.
But in reality, only the
group leader understands this; they contemplate everything,
arrange things for everyone to
follow, and then, in this way, they will
achieve enlightenment. But if someone doesn't
understand this, and the
group leader doesn't understand it either,
then the group leader is also
attached, and so am I.
Let me explain this in more detail.
So, when we're in
a group, when we have meetings,
it's egoless. After the meeting, if
we do our duties correctly, it's
egoless. But if we don't have meetings, we are egoistic. When we are
assigned tasks and
don't do our duties correctly, it's called
ego. That is, the ego only coordinates the
practice in that way, and we can't
overcome the ego, we can't be free
in all things. For example,
today it's still me, but if I'm assigned to wash dishes, I
wash dishes; if I'm assigned to sweep the house, I
sweep the house; if I'm assigned to clean, I
clean. That means a person must be
adaptable like that, without ego.  If there is no
obstacle, then it is called freedom from all
phenomena. This free mind is pure
cessation because it is free from anger, attachment, and
ego.
This mind is pure cessation and Nirvana.
Therefore, a truly enlightened practitioner can
practice anywhere. But a
person with an ego, with an ego, can only
command; they can't wash dishes; they
only teach others; they don't accept
others teaching them. That's the ego.
What is worth learning should be learned, what is
not worth learning should not be learned. That follows the
direction of the Supreme Being; there is
no ego. But
what is worth learning, don't act superior and
teach me! That's the ego, you
see? Therefore, a truly enlightened practitioner, one who
knows how to observe, can practice in any situation.
In
that Dharma assembly, it's about breaking the ego. When
we enter, it's about entering the Dharma.
Today, when we go to offer alms, we include those
who serve the bowls, those who cook the rice.
Serving the bowls is the Dharma, cooking the rice is the Dharma,
washing the dishes is the Dharma.  It belongs to the
Dharma, and I only cook rice, I don't wash dishes, that's my ego.
But when assigning tasks,
assigning someone to wash dishes today,
that assignment belongs to the Dharma, and
following this assignment means we are
egoless, without an ego, that's the Dharma.
This practice must be very profound. When we
work, we speak, so this
requires time for contemplation and meditation,
which leads to thorough understanding of the task. When we
understand this thoroughly, we go out and do our
work very well. Because of
building the Dharma center in this way, Yen
applies and sets out all the rules
so that even if people within it don't
know, can't think, or can't contemplate, they can
still achieve
egolessness through practice, like a blind person following
behind a sighted person, clinging to the
sighted person's coat to
reach their destination. The main thing is
knowing where the ethics lie: when discussing,
we discuss together; when working, we
abandon the ego. This assignment is
correct; we are the
blind people, but we are one step behind.
Our wisdom will come. But you, at one time,
just go around offering alms here and
there. You have an ego, so you only
get very little merit. Because with the
Dharma of non-self, practicing it brings
great merit. This merit is to
completely escape worldly suffering. That is,
this merit helps you eliminate a lot of karmic
suffering. If you only stay
in one Dharma center and practice well,
you will eliminate your karmic suffering
quickly and much. But if you go to ten
Dharma centers, you eliminate karmic suffering slowly and less, and you even
add more karmic suffering, meaning there is still the
nature of creation. That's the first case:
you have the same understanding, you go to
ten Dharma centers and you still practice that understanding. So when do
you practice two Dharma centers,
three Dharma centers, up to five Dharma
centers? In the first case, you have the same
understanding, but all
these Dharma centers practice harmoniously. That's many Dharma
centers. In the second case, when
you practice many Dharma centers, I see that
in one Dharma center, the Dharma center leader has
attachments, doesn't practice the Dharma, and doesn't
bring benefit.  If
anger arises and anger grows, and greed for
fame arises and is overcome, and
these things
lead to disharmony, then you should not
leave this place but seek
another place to participate in practice. Wherever you find a place where
greed does not arise and anger does not arise, and ego does
not
arise, then you should go there to
practice. That is when you should practice at two or
three places to find a
guide, a stable person with
wisdom and ability to help you progress
on the path. That is when you
seek two or three such places,
not because you only have a few coins and you
like to bring them here and there to gain merit. You gain merit
but it doesn't help you perfect
your virtue, resulting in small blessings. The
higher the ego, the smaller the blessings. If
you make a small offering but overcome the
ego, then a small offering brings a lot of blessings. There
is also a sutra here: "A
small offering brings a lot of blessings; a large offering brings a
small offering; a large offering brings a lot of
blessings."  The path to enlightenment is one of little
merit and little reward. Please refer to the
Buddhist scriptures and teachings that the
master has lectured on the Ba Vang Temple website. The scriptures,
such as the Buddha's teachings, contain
complete texts for your
contemplation. In my opinion,
you should reconsider the practice of the Dharma center and
your cultivation. When we enter the Dharma center, we
must have the Dharma to practice, to cultivate
mutual respect and understanding, to achieve repentance,
encouragement, letting go, reducing greed and anger,
and to cultivate contemplative thinking,
expanding wisdom to reduce delusion – that
is
good. Yes, thank you, teacher.
Listening to your sharing, I
thought about
a difficulty:
many people go to
many teachers and
many temples, making offerings to many temples. And
truly, after hearing your sharing, I
have a question: Is
this method of finding a Dharma center
similar to finding a teacher or
finding a temple to practice? I would
also like you to share
a little more in depth. Respectfully.  Dear audience, in
this Dharma realm, there is a causal relationship.
For example, the Buddha's disciples will be the
saints and masters. If there is a
good teacher, the disciples will harmonize, and the
Buddha's teachings will be put into
practice. If a great disciple of the Buddha does not
practice the Buddha's teachings, it is not right. The
Buddha's teachings also aim to reduce greed, anger, and
delusion. Many people think, "
I'm learning alone, I'll reduce greed.
I don't need the audience." But
who am I greedy with? Only with the audience can I be greedy, so
I'll reduce anger alone. Only with the
audience can I know that I have anger. Therefore, all
good deeds must arise from
harmony. If we are in harmony with others, we know that we are
not greedy. If we are in harmony
with others, we know that we are
not angry. If we are in harmony with everyone,
through contemplation,
we can eliminate greed and anger. Only then can we eliminate
attachment, eliminate the ego, and wear away delusion—that is
called ignorance. Only then can
we see the face of
ignorance and shatter the face of
ignorance. For example, today, let's walk together in a Dharma
hall with the nun and Duc Anh.  On a
bus, one bus at a time, when we arrived, the old
woman, Duc Anh, was careless and didn't give up her
seat. When she arrived,
my mind would immediately react: "Young and inconsiderate, you
don't know the old woman's intentions. People
keep standing here waiting, refusing to
give up their seats." If a practitioner were to contemplate, they
would think, "Ah, this is a karmic connection, a
karmic connection." So, I forgot the karmic connection, that's why
I'm standing here. I don't
know the intention. In this karmic connection, I
contemplate cause and effect, and then I stand there freely and without a care.
That's called the Dharma standing, not me
standing. Before, I was angry, so I was standing,
but there was no Dharma. Then,
after contemplating the Dharma,
my mind was not angry, my mind was not greedy, I didn't crave the
seat,
I wasn't angry, I was calm, I purified my
mind. That's the Dharma standing, but before,
I was standing. So, practicing alone, you can't
get rid of this ego. No matter
how much you contemplate, encountering the situation is what
truly constitutes contemplation. Before, it was just
contemplation to serve the purpose.
Truly practicing the Dharma is the right thing to do. If you keep
contemplating and contemplating for a long time, thinking
you are very pure, but when you encounter a situation, you realize
you are still the same. If you contemplate too much, you'll
think you've attained enlightenment and criticize
others. That's why many people practice alone,
without a teacher to guide them, without a community of fellow
practitioners. Then, arrogance will arise from this
imagined enlightenment, that
is, enlightenment in
imagination, enlightenment in thought, not
true enlightenment. True enlightenment includes thinking, speaking, and
acting according to the Eightfold Path. There are many things:
right thinking, right speech, right action, right livelihood,
right effort, right mindfulness, and then entering into
right concentration and liberation. But here,
you only have thinking; you don't have true enlightenment.
But when you say that practicing Buddhism is
very good, that it has cause and effect,
someone says, "Go
away!" They get annoyed. You're just an idiot. They've
already told you that. Regarding your
interactions with others, are you correct in understanding
cause and effect? ​​Are you adaptable to circumstances? Are you
able to react accordingly?
This mindset must accept those who
criticize it; only then will you realize that
your mindset is flawed. But can you put
it into practice?
In reality, it only takes a little
time to develop, but in practice, it erodes
gradually, little by little. There must be a
community, hence the saying, "A monk leaving the community will
perish." If there are no monks practicing
together, that monk cannot develop.
Don't think that being alone in one place,
one temple, without a community, can
easily lead to advancement. Secondly, a single
Buddhist practitioner in one temple, even if
I am the only one, will
fail. There must be
many equally powerful monastic communities; only then
will we have something to practice. Therefore, choose
a suitable environment for Buddhist practice
where there are many monastic communities.
One monastic community leader might be envious of another, so that they can
encourage and motivate
their community. Is this in
accordance with the Dharma? Otherwise, if there are
two monastic communities, and today my food is
better than theirs, that's even
worse.  As long as there is loss, envy, and attachment, there
will be rebirth in the cycle of reincarnation. Therefore, as a
Buddhist, one must live in a temple with many people, in
harmony, and have interaction with
each other in order to practice within a
monastic community. We must live in a monastic community with
many people and many monks so that we
can interact with circumstances and situations, and
see if our thoughts and actions are correct in practice. That's how
she answered. Yes,
thank you very much, teacher. I hope that you,
dear Buddhists or those
following this, will find the right
way to practice and
choose the right path, a temple,
and a place of refuge that is right for you.
[music]